.TH DIFFANAL-NORMALIZE 1
.SH NAME    \" Section header
.PP

diffanal normalize - Normalize abundances given raw counts and lengths

\" Convention:
\" Underline anything that is typed verbatim - commands, etc.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
.nf 
.na 
diffanal normalize abundance1.tsv abundance2.tsv ...
.ad
.fi

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-\-\flagfR[=\fIparameter\fR]
description

.SH "DESCRIPTION"

The
.B blt normalize
command attempts to normalize the read counts in 2 or more kallisto-style
abundance.tsv files.  Each TSV file represents a biological sample. 
Multiple samples are required in order to statistically estimate the
normalization factor.

Currently, only Median Ratios Normalization (MRN) is implemented.  This
method computes the average count for all samples of a given feature (e.g.
gene or transcript), then the ratio of each count to the average for the
feature, and finally the median ratio for each sample.  The median ratio is
the scaling factor for that sample.  This should, in theory, normalize for
differences in library size (total reads for a given sample).  This method
assumes that technical effects are the same for DE and non-DE genes and
that expression is roughly symmetric (there are equal numbers of
up-regulated and down-regulated genes).

Additional normalization methods, including the use of spike-in controls,
are planned for the future.

.SH FILES
.nf
.na
abundance.tsv - kallisto-style abundance estimates
.ad
.fi

.SH "SEE ALSO"
diffanal-abundance(1), diffanal-fold-change(1)

.SH BUGS
Please report bugs to the author and send patches in unified diff format.
(man diff for more information)

.SH AUTHOR
.nf
.na
J. Bacon
